v1.0.0
======

This is the first stable release of the Natural Robustness Toolkit (NRTK). The API is
hardened and will follow semantic versioning going forward: patch releases (1.0.x) for bug
fixes, minor releases (1.x.0) for backward-compatible features, and major releases (x.0.0)
for breaking changes.

v1.0.0 establishes the full foundation of NRTK for still-imagery computer vision robustness
evaluation. Future releases will expand into full-motion video, additional sensor modalities,
and broader operational domains.

There are no functional changes from v0.27.2 — this is a drop-in replacement.

What's in v1.0.0
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**27 perturber implementations** across five categories:

* *Photometric* (12) — blur (average, Gaussian, median), enhancement (brightness, color,
  contrast, sharpness), and noise (Gaussian, salt, pepper, salt-and-pepper, speckle)

* *Optical* (8) — physics-based perturbations via pyBSM (pybsm, defocus, jitter, turbulence
  aperture, detector, circular aperture) and radial distortion

* *Geometric* (4) — random crop, translation, rotation, and scale

* *Environment* (2) — haze and water droplets

* *Generative (experimental)* (1) — diffusion-based perturbation

* Plus ``ComposePerturber`` for chaining multiple perturbations and
  ``AlbumentationsPerturber`` for integration with the Albumentations library

**4 perturbation factories** for systematic parameter sweeps: step, linspace, one-step, and
multivariate.

**8 operational risk modules** mapping real-world degradation factors to NRTK perturbations
(atmospheric turbulence, defocus, extreme illumination, haze, high-frequency vibration,
radial distortion, sensor noise and resolution, water droplets), with an interactive risk
matrix.

**JATIC ecosystem integration** — NRTK is part of the
`JATIC <https://cdao.pages.jatic.net/public/>`_ product suite for AI Test & Evaluation. The
``nrtk.interop`` module provides full `MAITE <https://github.com/mit-ll-ai-technology/maite>`_
compliance, enabling NRTK perturbations to be applied directly to MAITE-wrapped datasets and
models alongside other JATIC tools such as
`DataEval <https://dataeval.readthedocs.io/>`_ and
`XAITK-Saliency <https://xaitk-saliency.readthedocs.io/>`_. This includes augmentation
adapters for both classification and detection tasks.

**Validation and Trust page** documenting current validation status, known limitations, and
a quarterly-updated roadmap.

**Comprehensive documentation** following Diátaxis structure (Getting Started, Tutorials,
How-To Guides, Explanations, Reference) with 19 example notebooks spanning core tutorials,
MAITE workflows, and XAITK-Saliency integration.

**Modular dependency architecture** — NRTK's core has a minimal dependency footprint,
with 10 optional extras that allow users to install only what they need. This makes NRTK
deployable into a wide range of environments, including hardened or restricted systems with
strict dependency policies. Python 3.10–3.13 supported.

Acknowledgment
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This material is based upon work supported by the Chief Digital and Artificial
Intelligence Office under Contract No. 519TC-23-9-2032. The views and
conclusions contained herein are those of the author(s) and should not be
interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements,
either expressed or implied, of the U.S. Government.
