v1.0.3
======

.. admonition:: JATIC Maturity I
   :class: note

   Release v1.0.3 has been assessed against and meets the requirements
   associated with JATIC Maturity Level I.

This patch release contains fixes to container security scanning, missing
documentation cross-references, container compliance pipeline components,
and notebook install cells. Key areas include adding the missing
medium-severity vulnerability scan to the container pipeline, completing
the cross-references between how-to guides and tutorials, refreshing
container compliance components, and resolving a ``torch`` /
``torchvision`` ABI drift that broke GPU saliency notebook execution.

Fixes
-----

* Fixed missing medium-severity vulnerability scanning in the container CI
  pipeline by adding Trivy scans.

* Fixed a medium-severity vulnerability in ``Dockerfile`` by updating
  ``pip`` to ``25.3``.

* Fixed missing cross-references between how-to guides and tutorials so
  each how-to links to the tutorials that exercise its perturbers and each
  tutorial points at the underlying perturber API how-to. Fixed
  inconsistent "Related How-To Guides" section headings across tutorial
  notebooks.

* Updated container compliance pipeline components in
  ``.gitlab-ci/pipelines/.gitlab-compliance.yml``.

* Fixed an outdated six-month roadmap (``ROADMAP.md`` and
  ``docs/figures/nrtk-road-map.png``).

* Fixed several repository-level documentation and CI items, including
  ``CONTRIBUTING.md``, ``README.md``, ``ROADMAP.md``,
  ``.markdownlint.yaml``, ``.gitlab-ci/.gitlab-docs.yml``, the
  ``nrtk_xaitk_workflow`` README, and license-header / docstring updates
  across a few notebook utility modules and perturber implementations.

* Fixed ``torch`` / ``torchvision`` ABI drift in
  ``image_classification_perturbation_saliency.ipynb`` and
  ``object_detection_perturbation_saliency.ipynb`` install cells by
  pulling ``torchvision`` from the same ``--extra-index-url`` as
  ``torch``. Without this, ``ultralytics`` would transitively install a
  mismatched ``torchvision`` wheel and the notebooks would fail at import
  time on Linux/CUDA hosts.

* Fixed stale notebook outputs in both XAITK saliency notebooks by
  re-executing them on a CUDA runner.

* Fixed pyright flagging public ``torch`` API (``torch.tensor``,
  ``torch.Generator``, ``torch.zeros``, ``torch.float32``, etc.) as not
  exported from ``torch``. Pyright 1.1.409 introduced a regression in
  ``reportPrivateImportUsage`` handling
  (`microsoft/pyright#11404
  <https://github.com/microsoft/pyright/issues/11404>`_). Capped the
  linting dependency to ``pyright<1.1.409`` (rather than excluding only
  the known-bad version) in ``pyproject.toml``, locking the supported
  install range to ``1.1.397``–``1.1.408`` so this release's dev
  environment keeps installing cleanly across its support lifetime
  regardless of future pyright releases.
